Hi, this is Scott. I
really appreciate our sponsors because
they make the show possible.
Today's show is sponsored by
developer express, become a UI
superhero with dev express controls
and libraries. Deliver elegant.net solutions
that address customer needs today
by leveraging your existing knowledge,
you can build next generation
touch enabled solutions for tomorrow,
you can download your free
30 day trial@dxdothanselminutes.com. That's dx.hanselminutes.com.
Hi, this is Scott Hanselman.
This is another episode of
Hansel minutes. And today I'm
talking with Amanda silver. She's
a partner director of program
management at Microsoft. Yo, how
long have you been at
Microsoft? Since 2001 to me,
my quick math I 16
years. That's cool. That's a
long time. You and I
got to work on a,
a demo together at the
connect conference. It's this conference
that we do every year
in New York and we demo
this thing called visual studio
live share. What is it
and why is it cool?
Well, I mean, so the
idea behind live share is
that you might want to
collaborate with another developer in
real time, but you want
to use your tools to
do it. So rather than
using screen sharing or some
other kind of mechanism, you
can basically take your familiar
tools, visual studio, or vs
code and connect to the
other person's workspace remotely. And
you can actually look at
all of their, all of
their files and make some
edits and make some, you
know, possibly debug together. So
you can work on bugs
and, and collaborate in real
time. Now that, that on
its face, that sounds like
Google docs for code. Yeah.
And a lot of people
try to make that analogy
and, and in a way
it is from an experience
perspective, but from an implementation
perspective, it's actually the wrong
analogy. More like a Skype
is actually more kind of
appropriate and kind of, but
it's not screen sharing though.
It's not screen sharing. That's
right. It's it's so in
a, in a Google docs
kind of a model, basically,
that's like, there's a common
document that both of you
guys are working on. That's
hosted in the cloud. Oh,
so neither of you have
the document locally in that
scenario, Julie, I mean, it
might be that you have
a local copy, but that
there's basically the master lives
in the cloud. Right. And
so both of you are
operating on the master, that's
in the cloud. Okay. In,
in this model with live
share, you know, we could
have hosted the source code
in the cloud, but that
actually comes with some, you
know, burden because you have
to take your source code
and you have to replicate
it in the cloud. You
might not want to do
that. Also, if you wanted
to get the rich experience
of, of code editing, then
you also have to replicate
your build environment and basically
everything it takes to compile
those files. And, and while
you might want to do
that, for other reasons, you,
you know, doing it to
be able to share should
be kind of an independent
decision. And so what we
wanted to do was to
make it so that you
could just take the code
that you're working on locally
and share it with another
developer and what's the best
way for that to happen.
Well, it's actually more like
a remote connection from your
visual studio instance to your
teammates. Okay. So then, then
the person that initiated the,
the, the remote sharing session
is the authoritative source. Yeah.
Yes. Yes. I mean, basically
the instance of the file
that's on the machine, on
their machine is the, you
know, the authoritative version. Right.
Okay. So if I have,
I have visual studio 2017
in my machine, I have
dotnet core two. Oh, I've
installed all this stuff in
order to do a hello
world. And then you are
elsewhere. You have visual studio
as well, but you don't
have.net even. Yeah. I'll I'll
I could have is just
like the most minimal install,
a visual studio, which has
no workloads on it. Like
the 10 minute install, the
two minutes, Two minute install,
the base thing, The totally
core base thing is all,
I need to be able
to connect my instance of
visual studio to your workspace
or project, and to be
able to start doing co-authoring
and co-editing and, and, and
co debugging. Then I make
a, I, I in instantiate
or I initiate a sharing
session, which creates this, this,
you know, cryptographic leaks, significant
URL. And I give that
to you via something, Twitter,
Slack teams, whatever you click
on it, and what happens.
I click on it. And
if I have a visual
studio or vs code installed,
then it will open that
session in vs code or
visual studio. If I don't,
then it'll prompt me to
download one of those tools
via a web handler. Yeah,
exactly. So a webpage comes
up and it basically, so
it does the, it's a
web handler. It looks to
see if you have one
of these things on your
machine and if you do,
then it opens it up,
right. And remotely connects to
your, to your workspace. Okay.
And I've done like remote
debugging before where like I've
installed, like back in the
day, like a long time
ago, years ago, I would
go onto a windows server
that did not have visual
studio. And I would install
the Microsoft debugger. And we
usually have like a, like
a slash slash debug share
or whatever. You'd copy the
debugger over there. You'd run
it. And it was just
there to hook into visual
studios, remote debugging and visual
studio. Remote debugging has been
a thing for years, right?
Yeah. The whole time. Yeah.
I mean, very long time,
like, Right. Like when you
go debug attach, you can
attach to a running process,
Your local machine, but you
can also, you can also,
in some cases attached to
a remotely executing process, well,
is this like that it
is very much like that.
And it's actually built on
top of that. So one
of the reasons why, how
we can enable the remote
debugging capability is because of
the remote debugging capability that
we already had in visual
studio. And one of the
kind of coolest things about,
about this whole thing is,
you know, the, the co-authoring
capability, which allows both of
us to type in the
workspace simultaneously. That's one set
of technology. And that's super
interesting topic that we could
talk about it in a
second, but the remote, the
code debugging is yet another
technology they actually have little
to do with each other.
And the code debugging is
basically just based on top
of our remote debugger that
we already have. And so
one of the coolest parts
about kind of getting to
this point, as we built
up both of these capabilities
in visual studio and vs
code is that we enabled
the remote code debugging, and
we did it for C
sharp. And then all of
a sudden it worked for
a whole bunch of different
languages. So we actually have
a version that like works
for Python, for example, I
mean, we didn't show it,
we didn't devil it just
because like, that's how our
remote debugger works. And, and
it just, it worked, Did
people know that visual studio
was that nicely factored that
this was going to be
a thing like the side
effect would be like, Oh,
wow, that is nicely. Like
the responsibilities of these components
were so discreet and clean.
This was a very pleasant
surprise with regard to the,
to the debugger, you know,
for co-authoring it's a little
bit more complex and that,
that involved a lot more
refactoring of. Okay. So that's
interesting. So there's two, this
is really important to just
like it's, it is holistically
visual studio live share, but
the debugging, the is one
discrete thing that is very
unique and very, not the
same as like, if you
remember ether pad from like
15 years ago, 10 years
ago, it was like the
first time we ever saw
two cursors within a single,
a single, Oh my God,
you can see your, I
can see your carrot, you
know? And that we take
that for granted. Like if
an app doesn't have that,
that the typing in the
same text file on the
web is almost become a
Right or even typing in
the same text file in
a file, in a file
share location is Yeah. You
know, that's actually interesting that
you say that because I
remember the idea of locked
files. I haven't actually thought
about a file being locked
on a share in years.
Like it used to be
a thing like, Oh, Hey,
yeah, Amanda, you've got that
file locked. Can you close
that? So I can open
it. That still happens sometimes.
Yeah. But like, not that
much, like I was actually
on my iPhone recently, I
opened up word, which, which
apparently no, no, no longer
impresses me, although I should
be amazed every time I
do it. And they share
like a huge amount of
the C plus plus code
with the actual words. So
when you run word in
the iPhone, it's effectively at
the same word that you
run on your windows machine.
And it was like, Oh,
Amanda's also in this file.
And then I'm like, Oh,
weird. Okay. And I scroll
down and there you are,
I'm on my iPhone and
I'm watching you type. Yeah.
Same thing for code now.
So same thing now for
code for visual studio. Okay.
So let's go back to
the, the remote person in
the example that we're giving
has no additional kind of
workloads. We say workloads, that
means they don't have Python.
They don't have all that.
They don't, even if I
went to the dot the
command line and type.net, nothing
happens because it's not installed.
How would you then get
IntelliSense? How would you get
refactoring? How would you get
right. Click go to definition?
Like those are things that
would have to work. Yeah,
Totally. So, I mean, in,
in some ways you might
think that you could take
a technology, like, you know,
office three, six, five, and
Hey, that looks like text
editing and Hey code is
texts. Like, can't, we just
take the word collaborative editing
experience and say, that's now
the basis for the code
editor for visual studio. Right.
And all of a sudden
you enable a collaboration. Right.
And we've seen other text
editors and IDs do similar
type things, but just typing
in the same sheet. Yeah.
But you can't really do
that with code. And the
reason for that is that,
you know, while you could
do that, if all you
were looking for was like
basic, basic, basic colorization. Right.
But what you really want
is a semantic understanding of
all of the code and
how it relates to each
other. Right. And to do
that, you actually need to
have an understanding of multiple
files that your code has
a dependency on so that
you can do the build
so that you can do
the semantic based, you know,
navigation like peak definition or
go to definition or something
like that, or refactoring things
like that. And also IntelliSense
depends on this. So, so
yeah, you need the multi
file understanding. And so one
of the things that makes
visual studio and vs code,
so, so good is that
we've been working on the,
the compilers and kind of
having a, a very, very,
and Roslyn, like an Omni
sharp as, you know, The
opensource C sharp compiler and
Omni sharp being the ability
to use any editor to
get IntelliSense on. Right, Right.
Right. So, so I mean,
part of the basis for
our compilers is that they
have this notion of D
compilation and recompilation right. So
that if somebody has a
program that they're writing, that,
that it's always, we try
to be as in a
high of a compiled state
as possible, so that we
can give the best tooling
experience to the, to the
user. If you make an
edit, then it basically decompile
that, you know, method, body,
or basically that kind of
block of code that, that
you're writing. And then it
recompiled, it, it, it basically
it's in, you know, compilers,
there's this notion of ASTs,
but basically it, it devolves
the AST into a lower
state. And then it has
to recompile and look at
all of the dependencies. So
an AST is an abstract
tree. And if I've got
a file with five or
six functions and I'm editing
function, number three, and I
type, you said that it
decompose and then recompile, why
doesn't it just throw away
that one? And then Because
the perf would not be
very good. So for us
to get really great perf
in, in our code editors,
we need to have everything
as high, a compiled state
as possible, so that we
can give you good IntelliSense.
And as you type squiggles
and stuff like that. So
the idea that when people
explain naively, for lack of
a better word, how visual
studio does its thing, they
think, Oh, well, as you're
typing, it's compiling everything. That
is a simplistic, It's kind
of decompiling and recompiling, just
the part that you're editing
and the dependencies that the
part that you're editing sophisticated
Delta. Yes. Yeah. And, and
we've been working on refining
it for years and years
and years, but here's the
thing that's really interesting about
what live share does is
it makes it now so
that you could have multiple
cursors, right? So you could
be in one part of
the file, or even in
a different file that has
a relationship you could be,
but you could be in
the same file in a
different function. I could be
in that same file in
a different function. We can
both make edits at the
same time and both of
our dependencies end up decompiling
to that earlier state and
then recombining. Okay. So that
gets interesting. So if Roslyn
and the way that the
system worked was fairly synchronous
and not reentrant, you could
get into some trouble, but
you're saying that it works.
I could have two, or
maybe even three, four people
in there doing this, and
it's smart enough to handle
it, but who's doing the
work, the machine that initiated
the session does all the
work. Yes. So what happens
is basically you are making
an edit and that edit
is being remoted to the
hosts machine. And the hosts
machine is doing all the
competition locally, but we had
to augment and enhance the
language service, which is another
word for the compiler, the,
as you type compiler. Right.
And make it so that
you could have two cursors
that could make an edit.
Simultaneously. You mentioned something in
kind of a throwaway comment.
I want to back up
to where you said the,
to get things like syntax
highlighting. Yeah. If the, if
the guest machine doesn't know
about C-sharp, who did the
syntax highlighting? How did the
text get colored? The, the,
the syntax highlighting specifically? Yeah.
Making things bold and making
things the right color. And
then, So there are, there
are different now you're really
getting like, I'm going to
get super compiler, geeky. I
need. Okay. For the, for
syntax coloring, there are basically
different levels of syntax colorization,
then that have different levels
of understanding of the semantic
basis of the code. So
one of the things that
you might see at some
point is you get basic
colorization for a language like
C-sharp, but there might be
some things like class names.
Okay. That might not be
colorized immediately. Right. And so,
so you can have a
basic colorization for a language
that understands the grammar, which
is basically this. Okay. No,
this is perfect. Let me,
I want to make sure
that I understand. So let
me stop for a second.
If I were going to
go into another text editor,
let's just say sublime and,
and someone opens up a
C-sharp file and they look
at it and like, everything's
a nice, attractive color, and
it's in a theme and
they might look at that
and go, ah, I got
syntax highlighting. I got colorization.
Yeah. That might be just
a series of regular expressions
and yeah. Underneath. Yeah. But
then they open it up
in visual studio and they
also get coloring and they
go look, it's the same.
Yeah. But to be able,
but, but see, this is
where as compiler geeks get
super nerdy is, is like,
you might get syntax coloring
and you might get grammar
checking like for the formal
language, but you won't get
semantic analysis. Which means that
you might, like, if you
think about a language could
have, I don't know, six
different colors in your code
editor based on the different
parts of the program that
you're writing it. That six
is the maximum. Okay. If
you had a not very
good understanding, because it was
just based on regular expressions
and, and syntax analysis, then
you might only see three
of those colors. Right. But
then as your understanding progresses,
then you could see four
colors in five colors in
six colors. Right. And so
each of those different levels
of analysis represent kind of
a, a more sophisticated type
of language service, Would you
say without necessarily insulting our
listeners? Would you say that
we, the users of these
things might make things, we
might oversimplify things. We like
that, like, you know, we've
all who everyone who's listening
is open to file, like
a JavaScript file up into
the sublime and they go,
Oh, look, it's got syntax
highlighting. And that's enough to
impress it's enough for me
to go, Oh, wow, cool.
Well, they didn't understand. Especially
when you're, you're looking at
stuff from a demo perspective,
like, you know, you see
it on a screen and
you're like, Whoa, okay, that's
blue. And that's, you know,
light green, like, yeah. Like
this is awesome. Right? Like
we have color check, colorization
check. But, but one of
the reasons why I love
working on developer tools is
that like developer tools are
an eight hour day product.
Right? Like our users use
them all the time, day
in, day out. Right. And
in that mode of use
it's those little things that
really really matter in terms
of your satisfaction with the
product. And so while a
demo might end up, you
know, giving you the, that
something has colorization, you know,
you won't know until you
actually use it, that it's
missing a whole host of
features that you have. It's
interesting that you say that
because there was someone I
got in an argument once
recently at an open source
conference where someone told me
that sublime invented IntelliSense and
Microsoft stole it. And then
we had this big, long
conversation and basically they had
misunderstood what IntelliSense meant and
they were confusing it with
auto-complete. So I went into
sublime and I typed a
big, long word, like supercalifragilisticexpialidocious
and I misspelled it. And
then I started typing super
and sublime was like, Oh,
I know that I've seen
that before. And I will
type it again for you.
That's not IntelliSense. Right. IntelliSense
is typing this and hitting
period. Yeah. And then a
magic happens, Basically the, the,
as you type the completion
is being pre-validated for acceptable
things so that you don't,
you don't type something that's
incorrect. Right. Exactly. And that's
why people who use TypeScript,
like it is, it makes
JavaScript more fun and less
dangerous. Yeah. Because of that,
that, that operatory Less of
a foot gun. Right? Yeah,
Exactly. So then back to
visual studio live, share I'm
on the host, I'm on
the guest machine. I don't
have C-sharp I type VAR.
I equals whatever I dot.
Yeah. How could you possibly
give me a list of
autocompletes on the VAR? You
don't know the type of
I yet, because you don't
have that compiler locally. You
couldn't give me the list.
Who does that work? So
what happens is your edits
get remoted to my machine
and then the language service
on my machine that has
all the context of what
that program needs to compile.
Basically power gives there's an
API call that happens that
will, would populate the statement
completion or the IntelliSense, and
give that back to your
machine and show it in
As I'm typing, as you're
typing. Yeah. That's crazy. It's
pretty cool. Okay. So that,
that gets me thinking about
like the levels then more,
because I was thinking, all
right, well, it's got syntax
highlighting, coloring check, and then
I'm thinking, Oh, well, I
can edit. And co-edit in
the same file check. Yeah.
But I, when you take
it to a more, like
you say, an eight hour
a day job, I need
to be able to explore
anyone's files. I want to
see the files view the
solution. I think that the
code that you're writing might
have a dependence. Right. Not
necessarily just what the person's
looking at. Yeah. And then
IntelliSense. So then beyond IntelliSense
or statement completion, there's things
like go to definition or
even like a refactoring, like
if I want to select
a bunch of texts and
then right. Click and say
extract method. Yeah. Who does
the host also? Does that
work? Yeah. So basically what
would happen is as you
type, we will be able
to, we, I shouldn't say
we as, cause I think
I oftentimes think of visual
studio, is we, like, I
am visual studio. I am
not visual studio, but I
sometimes need to remind myself
of that. So as you
type visual studio, basically remotes
all of that to the
host's machine so that you
can get, you know, light
bulbs and squiggles and IntelliSense
that's grammatically correct. And semantically.
Correct. So that you really
don't have to make a
miss mistype Direct connection. Like
if you or I are
in this, like I'm VPN
to the same company, are
you talking to some port
that I have to like
prompt the firewall to open
up? And then if I'm
at my house and we're
not on VPN, are you
routing it through some Nat
traversal technique? Yeah. So basically
if, if the initial, the
initiation has to go through
a service that we host,
but then after that, then
we do have the capability
for it to go via
a relay kind of thing.
And you know, there is
like, you need to, you
do need to open that
up so that the, so
that, you know, you can
have that direct communication. Yeah.
Like when I did remote
debugging, I had to open
the port to initiate the
remote. Yeah. You don't have
to go like open a
port specifically, but basically you'd
get a prompt, like visual
studio wants to access this
thing. Are you okay with
that? And is this like
HTTP or is it magic
binary thing or is it
like web RTC or web
sockets? It doesn't matter so
much. Right. My firewall is
not going to like find
it suspicious. It's just like,
just like Scott doesn't find
Skype suspicious or yeah. Right.
It's basically just the implementation,
you know, channel for, for
the two remote sites. But
then how does it work
on visual studio code, which
is written in Java script
and runs on Linux and
Mac and whatever. And it
works on visual studio, which
is a big giant windows
applicator. Yeah. It's, it's basically
a service that, that runs
alongside your visual studio or
vs code and the client
invokes that, that service. Okay.
And the service is running
right now in Azure, somewhere
like, I guess people are
signing up for previews and
you're going to get their
name on a list. And
then you'll use the number
of signups to get a
sense of how to scale
this thing out. So that
millions of What we're really
trying to do, we, so
anybody can go to aka.ms.
Forward slash vs. Live share,
and give us their email
address. And a little bit
of information. What we're hoping
to do is to open
up a preview in the
early part of next year,
very early part of next
year, and get a diverse
set of early alpha testers,
essentially need people with different
network conditions. We need people
with different languages and tools,
combinations. We need people with
different scale of their project
sizes so that we can
make sure that we're building
an experience that developers really
love. And so what we're
hoping to do is to
kind of get a small
group to start and we'll
ratchet it up over time
and it will, you know,
the selection will be based
on the diversity of, of,
you know, the set of
people that we need. We
need more know developers, we
need more C sharp developers.
We need more people with
this kind of network condition.
We need people in, you
know, in this region or
we need remote teams that
are, Yeah. The remote team
thing is huge. Cause you
know, my team is remote,
right? Yeah. You know, I'm
in Portland, Maria's in New York,
John's in San Diego, we're
all over the place. And
sometimes, you know, I'm at
a cafe and I've tethered
my phone. Right. And it
might be LTE, but it
might have some latency or
whatever. It'd be super awesome
if I could do that.
And like John calls me
and say, Hey, can you
connect in? And I just
pick it up. Yeah. And
one of the things that
we really need to make
sure to get this right,
is that it has to
be more reliable and robust
then screen-sharing right. Because, because
if you're going to go
and you know, screen-sharing is
your D it has to
be better than screen-sharing so
you don't do screen-sharing. Right.
And so part of that
is screen-sharing has a lot
of high bandwidth requirements. Right?
And like, if you're in
a cafe tethered to your
phone, sometimes you might be
able to screen share, but
sometimes you really aren't. And
honestly, even within Microsoft, like
even when we're entirely plugged
in and we have one
of the best networks in
the world, probably even that
in sometimes we have some
challenges with screen sharing. It's
funny that you mentioned that
because my surface book is
like 3000 by 2000 or
some stupid high resolution. And
when I screen share from
the cafe that I sit
at with my phone tethered,
I lower the resolution to
like 1366 by seven 68,
because I can't screen-share doesn't
that suck? No, it totally
sucks. But then, then they'll
go and say, Oh, can
I take over control? Right.
When they push that request
control button or whatever. And
then they always like, Oh,
the mouse isn't moving or
I've typed. And the thing
hasn't updated yet, it's because
you're pushing pixels around and
they J Peggy pixels. Right.
And with this, it really
is like one advantage just
from the pure bandwidth and
latency perspective. One advantage to
this approach is that we're
really sending only the minimum
information that we need to
power your code, editing experience
in the collaboration expense. What
am I typing? Where's my
cursor. So that's one major
advantage. But the other one
is that both of us
can use the editor that
I've personalized for my use.
And you can use the
editor that you've personalized, don't
change your hotkeys. Don't change.
Your windows are all in
the same places. If I
go into debug mode and
I have like, you know,
my favorite debug windows at
the bottom, like you don't
have to suffer through that
as we try to debug
a problem. Okay. Right. So
that means my solution Explorer
is docked where I want
it to be, my, my
fonts are my way, nothing
changes, Nothing changes. It's it's
your, your user expense. Has
there been any thought to
the specification of the protocol
and like making it a
thing that we put out
there in the world and
publish it and then maybe
some Emacs person might go
and implement that so that
an Emacs person Possibly, I
mean, basically the, there to,
you know, two different pieces
of technology that we're talking
about here. So there's the
co-authoring portion of it. And
then there's the code debugging
portion of it. Okay. The
code debugging portion of it
is based on the visual
studio, remote debugger, which we
don't, it's not currently an
open protocol. The co-authoring portion
of it is basically an
extension of the language service
protocol that vs code is
kind of based on top
of. And so, you know,
it's, it's, it would be
extending that. Okay. So then
theoretically, maybe the internet could
get together and make at
least the basics, like a
thing that we all standardize
on. And then the more
advanced things would be, like
I said, a separate thing.
Yeah. So it's aka.ms. Dot
also known as Dot M
S forward slash V S
live show. All right. Cool.
And theoretically, you know, after
the holidays, shortly, shortly after
the hall, basically when you
get back. Yeah. Essentially, we
didn't want to do it
over Christmas because our team
wouldn't be there to support
everybody through. Okay, cool. Yeah.
That's great. Well, thanks so
much for chatting with me
today. All right. It's fun.
This has been another episode
of Hanselminutes and we'll see
you again next week.